
Article title: 10 Best Wireless Work Headphones

Date published: 2020-03-08 11:22:38 

Article image: work-headphones.jpg 

Article content: Headphones have become an important part of the work environment as a means of tuning out distractions and getting into the work flow. From hip-hop to folk music, whichever music genre gets you through the work-day cannot blare in a quite workplace, so check out the top 10 best wireless work headphones to help you jam in the office or library. Before we jump in, let's get in to why wireless headphones are the ideal headphone for work places. 

Article slug: 10-best-wireless-work-headphones



Article title: How Beats by Dre changed the Headphones Game

Date published: 2020-03-11 12:50:49

Article image: beats-by-dre.jpg

Article content: With their iconic logo and strong celebrity presence, Beats has become the best known headphones brand within the last 10 years. Athletes, rappers, and popular celebrities all sport the headphones in advertisements and everyday life, but how did Beats by Dre become so popular? 

Article slug: how-beats-by-dre-changed-the-headphones-game



Article title: 5 Professional Gamers' Headsets

Date published: 2020-03-18 17:39:06

Article image: gaming-headset.jpg

Article content: Professional gaming is becoming a lucrative profession among younger generations.  With large followings and good statics, professional gamers turn what was once a hobby into a profession. Although every gamer may not reach mass stardom, anyone can feel like a professional gamer when using the right equipment. Here is a breakdown of 5 professional gamers and their gaming headsets.

Article slug: 5-professional-gamers-headsets



Article title: Wire vs. Wireless Headphones

Date published: 2020-03-19 18:00:16

Article image: wire-headphones.jpg

Article content: As technology has advanced, cords and wires have become a thing of the past.  Bluetooth has made cords unnecessary for most music lovers and big headphone brands have jumped on this trend.  But wires are still the best way to listen to music given wired headphones tend to support a higher number of kilobits per second (kbps).

Article slug: wire-vs-wireless-headphones



Article title: 8 Underrated Headphone Brands

Date published: 2020-03-21 11:14:46

Article image: underrated-headphones.jpg

Article content: Brands like Beats by Dre and Apple are arguably the most well recognized headphones on the market. But what about the other brands that have been providing quality sound way before the Apple Airpods dropped?  Let's take a look at 8 underrated headphone brands that may get you to switch your brand loyalty.

Article slug: 8-underrated-headphone-brands


