CLASSSES AND OBJECT

Source; Tutorialpoint pdf

What is a class?
A user-defined prototype for an object 
that defines a set of attributes 
that characterize any object of the class

what are atrributes?
The attributes are data members 
(class variables and instance variables) and methods, 
accessed via dot notation. 

what is a class variable?
 A variable that is shared by all instances of a class. 
Class variables are defined within a class but outside any of the class's methods


what is an instanc evariable?
IA variable that is defined inside a method and 
belongs only to the current instance of a class. 


then what is an instance?
Instance: An individual object of a certain class. 
An object obj that belongs to a class 

Circle, for example, is an instance of the class Circle. 

whaich of the variables are used most?
Class variables are not used as frequently as instance variables are. . 

what is adata memeber?
Data member: A class variable or instance variable 
that holds data associated with a class and its objects.

what is function overloading
Function overloading: The assignment of more than one behavior to a particular function. 
The operation performed varies by the types of objects or arguments involved

what is an inheritance?
Inheritance: The transfer of the characteristics of a class to other classes 
that are derived from it. 

what is Instantiation?
The creation of an instance of a class

what is method?
A special kind of function that is defined in a class definition. 

what is an object?
Object is A unique instance of a data structure 
it is  defined by its class. 

what does an object comprise of ?
An object comprises both data members 
(class variables and instance variables) and methods

what are data members?
class variables and instance variables

what is operator overloading?
Operator overloading is The assignment of more than one function to a particular operator. 


CREATING LASSES
what creata class definition ?
The class statement creates a new class definition

how is theclass statement like?
 The name of the class immediately follows the keyword class 
followed by a colon as follows: 

class ClassName: 
   'Optional class documentation string' 
   class_suit

how do you acces the class diocuementation string?
The class has a documentation string, which can be accessed via:
>>> ClassName.__doc__.

what is the class suite?
The class_suite consists of all the component statements 
defining class members, data attributes and functions.


ANALYSIS OF SIMPLE CLASS IN PYTHON (pg 261 -- tutorial point, python)